## EVALUATING AND COMPARING SEISMICITY MDEOLS IN THE LOW STRAIN RATE OTAGO REGION, AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND


The following contains the codes used to perform the analysis in:

Williams JN, Stirling MW, Howell A, McGrath J, Gerstenberger MC, Coffey G, Griffin JD, van Dissen R, Penney C, Chamberlain C (submitted) Evaluating and comparing seismicity rate models in the low strain rate Otago region, Aotearoa New Zealand

This study considers multiple seismicity rate models (SRMs) that have been developed for the Otago region of New Zealand Aotearoa. Codes are written in a combination of Python and MATLAB. The relevant analyses, inputs, and an associated ReadMe file, for each SRM is contained within its own folder. In addition, we signpost which codes were used to generate the figures in Williams et al (submitted):

-catalog_instrumental: analysis of Otago events located within the New Zealand Augmented Earthquake Catalog (Rollins et al 2022).

-catalogs_rsqsim: analysis of a 1 myr-long catalog of synthetic seismicity in Otago generated by the physics-based earthquake simulator RSQSim (Dieterich & Richards-Dinger 2010, Richards-Dinger and Dieterich 2012)

-catalog_stochastic: generation and analysis of stochastic event catalogs in Otago using information collated within the New Zealand Community Fault Model (NZ CFM; Seebeck et al 2024). The seismicity on each fault follows either a Poisson, Brownian Passage Time (BPT), or Weibull renewal process. The on-fault MFD can be set to be either characteristic or G-R (Youngs and Coppersmith 1985) and for segmented or combined fault sources. 

-nshm_inversion/solvis: selection of ruptures that include Otago faults from the rupture set developed for the 2022 New Zealand National Seismic Hazard Model (NZ NSHM 2022) Inversion Fault Model (IFM; Gerstenberger et al 2024). From this, and for different IFM logic tree branches, information about the rupture rates, traces, and patches can be obtained. Also downweights magnitude of each rupture based on its area within the Otago spatial polygon.

-nshm_inversion/mfd_analysis: using outputs from nshm_inversion/solvis, plot MFD of all Otago faults, or individual faults, as per the the NZ NSHM 2022 IFM

-nshm_urz: analysis of three Otago earthquake forecasts prepared for the NZ NSHM 2022 Distributed Seismicity Model (DSM): hybrid (Rastin et al 2024), uniform rate zone-poisson, and uniform rate zone-negative binomial (Iturrieta et al 2024). 

In addition, this library contains the following folders and files:

-gis_files: misc files need for various plots. Includes the file 'orb_area_polygon', which defines the spatial area assessed in this study.

-nshm_geodeticrates: extract slip rate estimates for Otago faults from the NZ NSHM 2022 Geodetic Deformation Model (Johnson et al 2024). 

-OtagoRangeBasinFaults.xlsx, 'segmented' tab: collation of Otago Fault attributes in the NZ CFM. This is used for segmented sources in the stochastic catalogs. 'combined' tab: cross referencing lookup table for amalgamating distinct NZ CFM faults (i.e., segmented sources) into combined sources for the stochastic event catalogs

-orb_fault_geometries: convert .ts fault geometry files in the NZ CFM into a MATLAB variables, and calculate the area of Otago faults

-paleoseismic_constraints: compile estimates for surface rupture timings in Otago from paleoseismic studies, and use to calculate an annual rate of surface rupturing events

## SCRIPTS [RUNS IN MATLAB]

all_catalog_comparison.m: Once all analyses and necessary output files have been generated in the folders listed above, this allows a comparison of the various seismicity rate models developed for Otago. Plots include:

-(1) stochastic event catalog MFDs for various renewal processes and on-fault MFD compared with catalog sample's MFD and moment rate distribution (equivalent to Figures 9 and S17-S19 in the manuscript)

-(2) plot and compare 9 stochastic event catalogs with different on-fault MFDs and renewal processes (but same aperiodicity)

-(3) histograms show distribution of interoccurrence times in the Otago RSQSim Catalog and stochastic event catalogs (equivalent to Figure S14 in the manuscript)

-(4) MFD plot for NZ NSHM 2022 IFM and Otago RSQSim Catalog, and stochastic event catalogs (equivalent to Figure 3 in the manuscript)

-(5) MFD of the Otago RSQSim Catalog and 70-year period samples (equivalent to Figure 8 in the manuscript)

-(6) plot and compare the NZ NSHM 2022 URZ 50-year forecast's MFD with 50 year samples from the Otago RSQSim Catalog and stochastic event catalogs (equivalent to Figure S15 in the manuscript)

-(7) plot and compare MFDs obtained from the NZ NSHM 2022 with the paleoseismic constraint, and the Otago RSQSim Catalog and stochastic event catalogs (with 10,000 catalog subsamples) to the paleoseismic constraint (equivalent to Figure 11 in the manuscript)

-(8) plot NZ NSHM 2022 based SRMs, Otago RSQSim Catalog, and stochastic event catalog MFD together

-(9) MFDs for NZ NSHM 2022 and Otago RSQSim Catalog to show influence of scaling down event magnitudes by area in Otago, and MFD comparison for geologic and geodetic deformation model IFM logic tree branches (equivalent to Figure S2 in manuscript)

## REFERENCES

-Dieterich, J. H., & Richards-Dinger, K. B. (2010). Earthquake recurrence in simulated fault systems. In Seismogenesis and earthquake forecasting: The Frank Evison (Vol. 2, pp. 233–250). Springer.
-Gerstenberger, M. C., Van Dissen, R., Rollins, C., DiCaprio, C., Thingbaijim, K. K., Bora, S., ... & Williams, C. (2024). The seismicity rate model for the 2022 Aotearoa New Zealand national seismic hazard model. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 114(1), 182-216.

-Iturrieta, P., Gerstenberger, M. C., Rollins, C., Van Dissen, R., Wang, T., & Schorlemmer, D. (2024). Accounting for the variability of earthquake rates within low‐seismicity regions: Application to the 2022 Aotearoa New Zealand National Seismic Hazard Model. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 114(1), 217-243.

-Johnson, K. M., Wallace, L. M., Maurer, J., Hamling, I., Williams, C., Rollins, C., ... & Van Dissen, R. (2024). Inverting geodetic strain rates for slip deficit rate in complex deforming zones: An application to the New Zealand plate boundary. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 129(3), e2023JB027565.

-Richards‐Dinger, K., & Dieterich, J. H. (2012). RSQSim earthquake simulator. Seismological Research Letters, 83(6), 983-990.

-Rollins C, Thingbaijam KK, Hutchinson, J, Gerstenberger M, Christophersen A, Eberhart-Phillips D, Rastin SJ, Van Dissen R. (2022). An augmented New Zealand earthquake catalogue, event classifications, and models of the depth distribution of shallow earthquakes in the greater New Zealand region Lower Hutt (NZ): GNS Science. 83 p. (GNS Science report; 2021/58).

-Seebeck, H., Van Dissen, R., Litchfield, N., Barnes, P. M., Nicol, A., Langridge, R., ... & Lee, J. (2024). The New Zealand Community Fault Model–version 1.0: An improved geological foundation for seismic hazard modelling. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics, 67(2), 209-229.

-Youngs, R. R., & Coppersmith, K. J. (1985). Implications of fault slip rates and earthquake recurrence models to probabilistic seismic hazard estimates. Bulletin of the Seismological society of America, 75(4), 939-964.
